Arrow Lake NPU Introduction and 
Features
Technical Training Material​
WW03, January 2024Intel Confidential
 2*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Legal Disclaimer
You may not use or facilitate the use of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal analysis You may no t use or facilitate the use 
of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal analysis concerning Intel products described herein. You agree to grant Intel a 
non-exclusive, royalty -free license to any patent claim thereafter drafted which includes subject matter disclosed herein.
No license (express or implied, by estoppel or otherwise) to any intellectual property rights is granted by this document.
All information provided here is subject to change without notice. Contact your Intel representative to obtain the latest Int el product specifications and 
roadmaps.
All product plans and roadmaps are subject to change without notice.
The products described may contain design defects or errors known as errata which may cause the product to deviate from publi shed specifications. 
Current characterized errata are available on request.
Intel technologies’ features and benefits depend on system configuration and may require enabled hardware, software or servic e activation. 
Performance varies depending on system configuration. No computer system can be absolutely secure. Check with your system man ufacturer or 
retailer or learn more at intel.com .
Intel disclaims all express and implied warranties, including without limitation, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular 
purpose, and non -infringement, as well as any warranty arising from course of performance, course of dealing, or usage in trade.
© Intel Corporation​. Intel, OpenVINO
 , the Intel logo, and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries.
*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
Copyright © 2024, Intel Corporation. All rights reserved.Intel Confidential
 3*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Agenda
▪Client AI and Roadmap
▪What is NPU?
▪What is MEP (Windows* Studio)?
▪Arrow Lake (ARL) NPU POR Features
▪ARL Audio Processing Object (APO)
▪NPU Software Enabling and Experiences
▪Q and A4*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialClient AI and RoadmapIntel Confidential
 5*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. AI Today
Enhancements
Elevated video collaboration & streaming
Enhanced Audio effects
Creator and Gaming effectsAI Tomorrow
Everything
AI Assistants know your daily context 
More creative, productive, & collaborative
Across everything you do
Cloud
Massive scalable compute
High Latency
Privacy Concerns
ExpensiveClient
Massive distributed scale
Low Latency
Improved Privacy
Lower Cost (to ISV)Transforming the PC ExperienceIntel Confidential
 6*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. AI Inflection Point
Microsoft* believes that neural processing units, like Intel’s NPU, represent an inflection point in 
computing and will be key to delivering a whole new range of delightful experiences to Windows* 
users on their PCs. These experiences will transform how people use their computers and connect 
with others. 
CPU GPU NPU
Launching New Client Compute Capacity at Scale
Intel Confidential
 7*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. CommercialMeteor Lake ISVs
CPU iGPU NPU
Sustained Workloads, 
dedicated offloadAI integrated with 3D/render/ media 
pipelines; high batch sizeFast Response, Low latency
Meteor Lake Lunar Lake (MX 17W) Arrow Lake Panther Lake
CPU 6(45W) 5 9 (45W) 14 5 11 (45W)
U-series H-series H-series S-series U-series H-series
iGPU 8 19 59 72 9 41 123 (45W)
NPU 11 45 11 13 48 48
Platform 
TOPS25 36 109 Up to 92 Up to 36 98 1828Q Client AI RoadmapIntel Confidential
 8*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. HW Value RPL MTL ARL LNL MX PTL
CPUSW Programmability; low latency, 
single inference tasksAVX -256 VNNI
H: 4 -5 TOPSAVX -256 VNNI
H: ~3 -6; U: ~2 -3 TOPSAVX -256 VNNI
H: ~7 -9.5; S: 14 TOPSAVX -256 VNNI
~2-5 TOPSAVX2+
TOPS -H: Up to 11; U: 5
iGPUAI integrated with 3D/render/ 
media pipelines; high batch sizeDP4A
H/U: up to 9 TOPS
S/HX: 3 TOPSDP4a (U, H)
H: up to 19 TOPS
U: up to 8 TOPSDP4a (U, S, HX)
~9 TOPS
ARL H w/XeMatrix 
Extensions (XMX)
Up to  72 TOPSDP4a + XeMatix
Extensions (XMX)
Up to 59 TOPSDP4a + XMX
H: Up to ~123 TOPS
U: up to 41 TOPS
iNPUDedicated AI Offload, Power 
efficiency for Battery LifeNANPU 2.7
TOPS -H: 11 TOPS; U: 9.5 -11; ARL S, HX: 13NPU 4.0
Up to 45 TOPSNPU 5.0
Up to 48 TOPS
3
Bursty , Latency 
sensitiveSustained, Battery 
life sensitivePeriodic, Throughput 
sensitiveClient AI Workloads are Diverse
No Single Compute Unit Meets All Key Needs
The Right Frameworks for Innovation and Scale:TOPS will vary slightly based on power & frequency of each sku
WebAssembly
WebGPU
WebNN
8Q Client AI Roadmap (Cont.)9*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialWhat is NPU?Intel Confidential
 10*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Drivers for Windows and LinuxReduce Memory I/O Usage Fast, Ultra Low Power Inferencing
Improve System and App ResponsivenessPerformance Up to 13 TOPs (int8)
MAC Engine 4096 (INT8) with FP32 Accumulator
Local Cache 4096 KB Software -Managed
Programmable DSP VLIW supporting Integer, FP, Transcendental
Peak Memory Interface BW 64 GBps , Unified Memory Architecture
Internal Data Type Support INT8, FP16, BF16, FP32 (emulated)
Hardware CompressionQuantized Data Type Support
Fine -Grain Weight and Activation Sparsity
Weight Compression
MAC Fixed Function supportGeneral Matrix -Matrix, Matrix -Vector
Convolution, Fully Connected, Reshape
Elementwise Fixed Function 
supportReLU /PReLU
Add/Mul
Quantize/Dequantize
Reshape
OS Supported Windows* OS, Chrome*, Linux*
Runtime Framework SupportOpenVINO
 Toolkit, ONNX RT, 
WinML /DirectML, WebNN
NPU
Tile
Cache2K Multiply 
Accumulat
e Engine
Post 
Processing 
Engine
AI DSP 
Processor
Cache2K Multiply 
Accumulat
e Engine
Post 
Processing 
Engine
AI DSP 
Processor
1. At Vmax in 15W MTL/ARL workload. Peak TOPs 13 at 1.6 GHz ResNet50, Int8, BS1, 50% 
sparsity
2. See backup for workloads and configurations. Results may vary.2K Multiply 
Accumulat
e EngineTile
Post 
Processing 
Engine
AI DSP 
Processor
CacheArrow Lake: Neural Processor Unit
Power Efficient AIIntel Confidential
 11*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Software Frameworks for Innovation and Scale
Underlying technology ingredient and 
vertical option on Windows*/Linux*.
OpenVINO
 powers ONNX* -Runtime, 
Web, ChromeOS* interfaces.
Onnx -Runtime Web
TFJS or TFLITE for Web
Web Neural 
Network API*
Chrome/Edge
WinML
DirectML
NNAPI runtime 
→TF-Lite*
Chrome OSNNAPI/TFLITETFLITETraining Frameworks / Tools
NNAPI  delegate for NPU
Consult OSV for any OEM 
differentiation opportunity
LinuxModel distribution formats
Inference Frameworks
Targeted Operating Systems
Windows* ML + DirectML
ONNX -Runtime + OEM choice of EP 
(DirectML, MLAS, OpenVINO
 )Intel® Neural Compressor
NNCF
Native deployment support in 
evaluation, not on roadmap
NOT POR for GPU/NPU
Embracing and Enabling an Open EcosystemIntel Confidential
 12*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. NPU Value Prop
Workload’s Good for the NPU:
Performance
To run advanced, higher quality 
AI models for Richer 
ExperiencesBattery Life
Deliver premium AI based 
experiences without sacrificing 
battery lifeResponsiveness
Free the CPU and iGPU for 
greater responsiveness & 
productivity
Sustained AI Workloads Offload the CPU, iGPU , dGPU for responsiveness Require High integrated TOPs
Model Characteristics: small Batch Size, FP 16/Int8, Sparsity enabled models
Image, Video, Audio
Client AI -Todd MatslerIntel Confidential
 13*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Resnet50 Example Based on MTL 
▪Peak TOPS ( pTOPS ) = Peak Theoretical Max Performance 
pTOPS = max frequency * (MAC/Clock) * 2
NPU is 11 pTOPS
▪Effective TOPS ( eTOPS ) = Real Performance on a given AI 
Workload (the efficiency of pTOPS )
eTOP S= (fps * each frame GOPs )/1000 
NPU 8.2 eTOPS = (1000 * 8.216 )/1000
▪We use ResNet50: a common network + a good mix of a 
memory and compute bound network. Is it Perfect? -> No, but it 
is better than pTOPS as eTOPS shows real workload measured 
across many HW configs
▪AI Benchmark for Client: Not 1 standard Today (UL Procyon 
Redowa (POR)/ MLPerf /GeekBenchML )
Input 224x224 Output (frame)Workload
(MACs operations on NPU)
▪Operations per 
frame: constant 
value per network, 
for Resnet50 it is 
8.216 GOPs
One multiply -accumulate is two operations
1measured on early MTL Si & SW: B0 Si, pre -beta SW 2/3/2023
2with 50% sparsity enabled, estimated target for production Si and SW is ~1000fps & ~8.2 
eTOPS
3MTL RN50: RN50 1.5 Open Model Zoo; QCOM RN50 version is UL Procyon AI Inference 
benchmark 2.4.0
4QCOM reports 29 pTOPS for 8cx Gen3 full SOC (CPU/GPU/NP); NPU only pTOPS estimated 
by Intel, based on current Intel internal analysis of available informationIntel Confidential
 14*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. NPU OpenVINO
 Plus DirectML Stack
▪Unified driver architecture using Microsoft* 
Compute Driver Model (MCDM)
▪OpenVINO
 via Level 0 interface, 
WindowsML /DirectML via DX12
▪DX12 UMD in NPU SW stack supports 
WindowsML /DirectML
▪OpenVINO
 tools used to quantize/lower any 
ONNX* model for NPU execution
▪OpenVINO
 Apps compile & execute models 
using NPU Compiler tool chain & L0 NPU driver
▪DirectML use DML compiler plus NPU compiler 
tool chain and DX12 UMD
▪The NPU Driver package includes NPU FW and 
Compilers to support JIT CompileWindows* SW Stack
15*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialWhat is MEP (Windows® Studio)?Intel Confidential
 16*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. What is MEP?
▪Example: Configurable MEP effects by Application ▪MEP standardized control interfaces (Camera 
DDIs and APIs)
▪MSFT provide consistent AI Models:
▪Optimized Algorithm for NPU
▪OEM/ISV apps can apply effects to any cameraWhy Microsoft* Effect Pack?
▪MEP DDI Interface 
WinOS Behavior
User/Application VisibleIntel Confidential
 17*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel® NPU (NPU) Running Windows* Studio (MEP)
Intel Confidential
 18*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Windows* Settings Camera Page and Inbox Camera Application
Intel Confidential
 19*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. New TEAMS* –Settings Page
20*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialARL NPU POR FeaturesIntel Confidential
 21*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. ARL NPU POR Features –MEP + APO
Notes:
▪Intel will work with Microsoft* to evaluate future capabilities for ARL and beyond
▪Customers should contact Microsoft* to discuss MEP feature roadmap
▪APO depends on OEM choice and optimization with Intel
▪For “Voice Focus”, it is CPU only for now. NPU is TBD.MEP (Windows* Studio Effects)
Bokeh
Voice access/ Live 
caption Auto FramingARL NPU
NPU
NPU
NPU
Eye Contact Correction
Voice Focus*Background Blur
NPU
NPU
CPU
More.. (TBD) NPU
+APO Vendor 
Waves
FortemediaNPU
NPU
Elevoc
DolbyRealtek
NPU
NPU
NPU
IntelligoNPU
22*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialARL APOIntel Confidential
 23*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Audio AI Offload Transitions to NPU
TGL-MTL platforms include GNA for 
offloading Dynamic Noise Suppression 
(DNS) from CPU.
▪DNS and other audio AI workloads 
(example: ASR) will migrate to NPU
▪Migration starts on MTL, completes on 
LNL (no GNA)
▪Most S0 audio processing will run on 
either NPU or CPU
▪Post processing of audio playback runs 
on a DSPCPU
I/O
ACE 
DSPGNA
Smart 
Amp
NPU
BT/USB
Array MicrophonesLong duration 
workloads target NPUShort duration, lowest 
latency workloads 
target CPUIntel Confidential
 24*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. APO –Audio Processing Object
▪Windows* allow OEMs and third -party audio hardware manufacturers to include 
custom digital signal processing effects as part of their audio driver's value -added 
features. These effects are packaged as user -mode system effect Audio Processing 
Objects (APOs).
▪Audio processing objects (APOs), provide software based digital signal processing for 
Windows* audio streams. An APO is a COM host object that contains an algorithm that 
is written to provide a specific Digital Signal Processing (DSP) effect.
▪Examples of APOs include graphic equalizers, reverb, tremolo, Acoustic Echo 
Cancellation (AEC) and Automatic Gain Control (AGC). APOs are COM -based, real -time, 
in-process objects.Intel Confidential
 25*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel® SoC    Intel® SoC .Zoom* / Teams*
Windows*  Audio   .
Framework
Intel® SST Audio DriverApplication
Layer
OS Layer
Hardware
LayerDNS -Supported APO 
(handled by CPU)
Zoom* / Teams*
Windows* Audio 
Framework
Intel® SST 
Audio DriverDNS -Supported APO (offload to 
Intel® NPU)
Intel®  
NPU HW
InternetCPU Mode Intel® NPU Offload Mode
Intel® DSP HW
Recording 
audio flowRecording 
audio flowAudio Flow with Intel® NPU DNS
Intel® DSP 
HWIntel® NPU 
Driver26*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel ConfidentialNPU Software Enabling and ExperienceIntel Confidential
 27*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Q4 ‘23
OCT NOV DECQ1 ‘24
JAN FEB MAR
Meteor Lake
Launch EventQ2 ‘24
APR MAY JUN
CES 
Platform LaunchCommercial 
Launch
Investor DayRSA
Security Event
▪Rewind
▪Adobe
▪Microsoft MEP
▪Microsoft Teams
▪Windows Accessibility
▪Gimp
▪Xsplit
▪Audacity
▪OBS
▪iQiYi
▪Wondershare
▪ByteDance
▪BufferZone▪Zoom
▪Crowdstrike
▪Magix
▪Cyberlink
▪Skylum
▪VMware WS1▪Office & Co -Pilot
▪Adobe
▪Microsoft Defender
▪Crowdstrike
▪Zoom
▪Teams
▪Cisco Webex
▪Tencent Meeting
▪Autodesk
▪Google Meet
▪Figma
▪GoTo Technologies
▪Ivanti
▪Khan Academy
▪Adobe
▪Gimp –Stable Diff
▪Zoom
▪Teams
▪Cisco Webex
▪Crowdstrike
▪Autodesk▪Defender
▪Trend Micro
▪BitDefender
▪CrowdStrike
▪BufferZone
▪Trellix
▪Sophos
Intel Vision Series:  AMR, EMEA, APJ/PRC
Microsoft Build
▪Adobe
▪Microsoft Teams
▪WebEx (AI tech preview)Cisco WebEx One
Intel Client AI
Industry Enabling
Figma
▪Regional ISVs & Solution Partners
▪Future AI use casesBETT (Edu)
Platform Launch
▪Microsoft MEP
▪Teams
▪Zoom
▪Windows
▪Adobe
▪Google Meet
▪Labster
▪VictoryXR
Meteor Lake ISV AI MomentsIntel Confidential
 28*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. 
“Microsoft believes that neural processing units, like Intel’s NPU, represent an inflection point in computing and will 
be key to delivering a whole new range of delightful experiences to Windows users on their PCs. These 
experiences will transform how people use their computers and connect with others. We are closely partnering 
with Intel on NPU and are excited to share more soon.”  -Vivek Pradeep, Partner Research Manager, Microsoft
ISV Partner Targets (not a POR). List Not Exhaustive.▪Microsoft* Collaboration:
•Windows* Studio Effects, OS Accessibility, and New OS Experiences
•1st party App AI experiences: Office and Teams
•Co-engineering DirectML for NPU –for broader scale
•Supports ONNX Runtime DML -EP
▪Industry -standard Software Framework Support for Broad, Open ISV Application Ecosystem
▪Enablement of Select OEM Proprietary Models
NPU Software EnablingIntel Confidential
 29*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. AI Workload Briefcase
▪Visit AI Workload Briefcase , 
•Videos Reference:
•GIMP with Stable Diffusion 
•Adobe Lightroom Classic AI Photo Editing
•AI Enhanced Collaboration with Windows 
Studio Effects
•Wondershare Filmora : AI Video Editing
•Workload Assets:
•GIMP with Stable Diffusion
•Adobe Lightroom Classic AI Photo Editing
•XSplit VCam NPU Background 
Segmentation 
•Etc.
Intel Confidential
 30*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Basic  Blur Advanced Blur New and improved features
New!
Auto -framing 
Eye contact 
Avatar representation
Gesture recognitionImproved!
Background Concealment 
Dynamic Noise Suppression 
CPU Workload
Advanced BlurWith NPU No NPUEnhanced Collaboration ExperiencesIntel Confidential
 31*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Generative AI Experiences
Open -source GIMP plug -in for Stable Diffusion at Performance
10 5 20 30 40 50
Text Prompt: cyborg man with a highly detailed, intricate details, carved by Michelangelo
Intel Confidential
 32*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Realtime motion 
capture for 
Unreal Engine
Maintain/improve 
render 
performance on the 
GPU by offloading 
the AI to the NPU
Seeding Open -Source ProjectsIntel Confidential
 33*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. AI Today
Enhancements
Elevated video collaboration & streaming
Enhanced Audio effects
Creator and Gaming effectsAI Tomorrow
Everything
AI Assistants know your daily context 
More creative, productive, & collaborative
Across everything you do
Cloud
Massive scalable compute
High Latency
Privacy Concerns
ExpensiveClient
Massive distributed scale
Low Latency
Improved Privacy
Lower Cost (to ISV)Transforming the PC Experience34End