DirectML Readiness and 
Example
Technical Training Material
WW26 , June 2024Intel Confidential
 2*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Legal Disclaimer
You may not use or facilitate the use of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal analysis. You may n ot use or facilitate the use 
of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal analysis concerning Intel products described herein. You agree to grant Intel a non -
exclusive, royalty -free license to any patent claim thereafter drafted which includes subject matter disclosed herein.
No license (express or implied, by estoppel or otherwise) to any intellectual property rights is granted by this document.
All information provided here is subject to change without notice. Contact your Intel representative to obtain the latest Int el product specifications and 
roadmaps.
All product plans and roadmaps are subject to change without notice.
The products described may contain design defects or errors known as errata, which may cause the product to deviate from publ ished specifications. 
Current characterized errata are available on request.
Intel technologies’ features and benefits depend on system configuration and may require enabled hardware, software or servic e activation. 
Performance varies depending on system configuration. No computer system can be absolutely secure. Check with your system man ufacturer or 
retailer or learn more at intel.com.
Intel disclaims all express and implied warranties, including without limitation, the implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, 
and non -infringement, as well as any warranty arising from course of performance, course of dealing, or usage in trade.
Altering clock frequency, voltage, or memory interface speeds may void any product warranties and reduce stability, security, performance, and life of 
the processor and other components. Intel has not validated processor running memory above Plan -Of-Record (POR) speed. DRAM/DIMM devices 
should support desired speed, check with DRAM/DIMM vendors for details. System manufacturers are responsible for all validati on and assume the risk 
of any stability, security, performance, or other functional issues resulting from such alterations.
© Intel Corporation. Intel, the Intel logo, and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries. 
*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 
Copyright© 2023 Intel Corporation. All rights reserved.Intel Confidential
 3*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Intel Optimized AI PC Stacks
Intel Confidential
 4*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Readiness
Below models are already supported on NPU
Model Type Model Name
Public whisper_base_encoder_lm_fp16_layernorm_gelu
Public whisper_base_decoder_static_kvcache_128_lm_fp16_layernorm_gelu_4dmask
Public whisper_base_decoder_static_non_kvcache_lm_fp16_layernorm_gelu_4dmask
Public mobilenetv2 -7-fp16 -optimized
Public resnet50 -v1-12-fp16
Public efficientnet -lite4 -11-fp16
Public squeezenet1.0 -12-fp16Intel Confidential
 5*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DML Benchmarking
Wait for public binaries from MSFT ,its expected to be available beginning of July
DirectML/Releases.md at master · microsoft /DirectML (github.com) directml.dll v1.15
Need to e nable Developer Mode in Settings> System> For developers> Developer Mode ON
▪WinMLRunner :
▪WinMLRunner.exe -model whisper_base_encoder_lm_fp16_layernorm_gelu.onnx -GpuAdapterName boost -perf -
iterations 10
▪WinMLRunner.exe -model squeezenet1.0 -12-fp16.onnx -GpuAdapterName boost -perf -iterations 1000
▪DxDispatch :
▪dxdispatch.exe -i10 -a Boost whisper_base_encoder_lm_fp16_layernorm _gelu.onnx
▪dxdispatch.exe -i1000 -a Boost resnet50 -v1-12-fp16.onnx -f N:1
Intel Confidential
 6*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. Setup Environment
1.Test configuration:
▪Platform: MTL
▪OS: Win11 22H2 or 23H2 
▪NPU driver: 32.0.100.2540
▪GPU driver: 31.0.101.5334+
2.Install Visual Studio 2022 (community version is ok): 
▪install "Desktop development with C++)
3.Copy Lab1 DirectML “Samples” and “Libraries” folders to C: \Users \Public
4.Build Direct MLNpuInference :
▪Launch C: \Users \Public \Samples \DirectMLNpiInference \Direct MLNpuInference.sln  by Visual Studio 2022
▪Start build by selecting debug /x64 and click “Local Windows Debugger” 
5.Build Direct MLSuperResolution :
▪Launch C: \Users \Public \Samples \Direct MLSuperResolution \Direct MLSuperResolution.sln by Visual Studio 
2022
▪Start build by selecting debug /x64 and click “Local Windows Debugger” Intel Confidential
 7*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference)
DirectMLNpuInference
A minimal but complete DirectML sample that demonstrates how to perform OnnxRuntime
inference via D3D12 and DirectML on a NPU. Select a NPU device, create a OnnxRuntime session, 
execute the model on the NPU, and retrieve the results. This sample executes the mobilenet
model.
Intel Confidential
 8*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Currently, we can only run this sample on MTL with SV2 OS: 
▪NPU has moved to being generic ml device instead of core compute on 24H2:
▪const GUID dxGUIDs [] = { DXCORE_ADAPTER_ATTRIBUTE_D3D12_CORE_COMPUTE }; (SV2)
▪DXCORE_ADAPTER_ATTRIBUTE_ D3D12_GENERIC_ML (24H2)
▪Need generic ML update to support LNLIntel Confidential
 9*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Intel Confidential
 10*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Intel Confidential
 11*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Intel Confidential
 12*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Intel Confidential
 13*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (NPU Inference) (Cont.)
Intel Confidential
 14*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (Super Resolution)
DirectML Super Resolution
This sample demonstrates the DirectML API by implementing a super -resolution machine learning 
(ML) model on the GPU. This includes converting between image and tensor formats, initializing 
and executing ML operators, and interleaving graphics and ML work. The ML model performs a 
smart upscale of an image to double its original resolution. For example, it can scale a 540p image 
to 1080p.Intel Confidential
 15*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. DirectML Example (Super Resolution) (Cont.)
The primary purpose of this sample is to demonstrate usage of the DirectML API for real -
time graphics processing. The particular super -resolution model is rather heavyweight, so 
a GPU and driver with dedicated ML support is recommended to run at higher 
framerates :
•CreateDeviceDependentResources : This calls into several methods to create and initialize the resources 
required to run the ML model and render the results. In particular, CreateDirectMLResources creates all 
the DML operators that comprise the model, as well as the D3D resources used to store intermediate 
results, and shaders to convert between texture and tensor formats. InitializeDirectMLResources binds the 
D3D resources to the operators and runs operator initialization.
•Render : If DirectML processing is enabled, this runs the operators using their bound resources to perform 
the super -resolution method on the current video frame. When DML is disabled, it uses a simple bilinear 
upscale. The result is rendered to the screen.Intel Confidential
 16*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. ▪Image to Tensor
▪Get residual image
▪Tensor to image
DirectML Example (Super Resolution) (Cont.)Intel Confidential
 17*Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. All products, computer systems, dates and figures specified
are preliminary based on current expectations, and are subject to change without notice. 
DirectML Example (Super Resolution) (Cont.)18